---
date: 2007-05-08 18:41:00+00:00
layout: post
title: Actually seeing famous people


categories:
- celebrities
- Photos
---

Okay, so after much bitching I finally have seen some celebrities in NY,
although oddly, only on the subway. I kind of assumed they took cabs everywhere
but apparently the subway is even convenient for them.

First I saw [Carson Kressley](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carson_Kressley),
aka The Queer Eye guy. This one was a weird sighting since it was all people
trying to get to work by 9am and the train was packed. Dude was wearing so much
pink he looked like a lawn flamingo with enormous sunglasses. Just a wild
guess, but I don't think he was trying to blend in.

Second, I saw [Little Carmine
Lupertazzi](http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/little_carmine.shtml)
from the Sopranos, AKA Ray Abruzzo. I live near Little Italy so it spooked me
to see faux Mafia types running around in the neighborhood. Then of course he
got on the subway with me. I'm a big fan of the show (although its final
episodes are really tanking quickly for some reason) so I wanted to grill him
for spoilers but I didn't. IMDB [tells me](http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0009410/)
he has been in shows like Trapper John, Riptide, Falcon Crest, and 21 Jump
Street.

Finally (today) I saw [Ajay Naidu](http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0619651/), AKA
Samir from "Office Space". (Coincidentally, appeared in one episode of "The
Sopranos") This one was hilarious since I was on the subway and staring at him
like I knew him from school or something and he noticed. We exchanged hellos
and then I felt bad - I figure he'd probably want to be left alone. Of the
three, he's really the only one I would have wanted to talk to, largely about
Office Space, but it seems like people largely leave famous folks alone in NY
and that's probably why they live here.

I'll stop complaining now.
