---
date: 2011-01-13 16:33:39+00:00
layout: post
title: I built an igloo

categories:
- boston
- graffiti
- igloo
- Photos
- snow
- winter
---

Years ago, after a long night of acting like a 24 year-old in Chicago, I was
tricked by a lawyer into helping our mutual friend move during the winter.
While many hilarious things happened that weekend, I remember it most vividly
as the first time I saw an igloo. A real igloo like in a cartoon.

It was in the tiny back yard of the walkup we were moving into, and it was the
first thing we noticed when unloading the U-Haul. We stopped and stood around
it asking each other questions. Who built it? Where did the idea come from? How
did the roof work? Was it warm? Later, we would speculate on what our future
wives would be like, as young men do, and hope we found partners who would be
as interested in igloos as we were.

On 1/13/2011, a blizzard hit Boston and dropped almost a foot of snow on the
ground. My office was closed for the day, giving me the first snow day I'd had
in years. My friend Jim texted me to see if I had any good ideas for how to
spend the day. "We're building an igloo" I wrote back. And it began.

Without any research or preparation, we trudged out into the mushy gray urban
snow and picked up some cardboard boxes from the local grocery store. We headed
out to a nearby park and started construction without any real plan. I'd tried
to build one years before and failed miserably (I blame the snow quality).

[![](http://activationenergy.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/img_00151.jpg?w=300)](http://activationenergy.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/img_00151.jpg)

We cleared a ring in the park and began making bricks by packing snow into the
cardboard boxes. We noticed each successive layer of bricks compacted the lower
levels, turning them into a solid ice-like wall. During construction we bumped
the walls several times, noticing the increasing toughness throughout the day.
Working with freshly fallen snow was definitely a big help.

After setting the foundation down, most of the discussion was focused on the
curvature of the wall and forming the roof,  the most difficult part of the
construction. The roof was also the most popular topic of discussion for
passers-by, who posed for pictures in front of it and told us how awesome it
was. We also began building an archway entrance and planned on adding a
keystone to hold the arch at about 4 feet off of the ground. This part did not
work out well.

It turns out architects since the beginning of time had been using the concept
of an inverted caternary arch
([Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catenary#The_inverted_catenary_arch))
in building construction. A caternary is basically a parabola-shape where the
bricks all lean against one another and somehow the whole thing stays up. In an
igloo, the bricks successively bend more and each ring holds up the one above
it (in theory).

[![](http://activationenergy.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/img_00231.jpg?w=224)](http://activationenergy.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/img_00231.jpg)

We stacked successive bricks closer to the center and got the walls to bend
somewhat. The right side curved too quickly and collapsed a few times in the
process. After about 5 hours of work, we called it a night when we finally
managed to close the archway and get a few more bricks onto the top layer. The
roof ended up with a sizeable hole and we felt it was incomplete, but then
again we were exhausted.

[![](http://activationenergy.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/img_09991.jpg?w=300)](http://activationenergy.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/img_09991.jpg)

After breaking for dinner, we returned to the site and found someone's
spraypainted graffiti tag inside. I would have preferred something more
imaginative than random letters, but it gave the igloo some character.


[![](http://activationenergy.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/img_0031.jpg?w=300)](http://activationenergy.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/img_0031.jpg)


Here are some pics of the final construction - it's not bad for a first try and
we definitely learned some ways we can improve the process. For one thing, we
could have bought a contraption that helps build perfectly-sized bricks in half
the time ([link](http://www.grandshelters.com/icebox-igloo.html)).

[![](http://activationenergy.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/img_00321.jpg?w=224)](http://activationenergy.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/img_00321.jpg)

[![](http://activationenergy.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/img_00331.jpg?w=300)](http://activationenergy.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/img_00331.jpg)

The final structure was not perfect ([like this
one](http://www.flickr.com/photos/56652585@N02/5231946505/)) but we were
pleased with the result. It was quiet and somewhat warm inside, but more
importantly, it was fun to build. I hope it survives for a few days.
