---
date: 2011-02-04 14:12:37+00:00
layout: post
title: Nostalgia bands

categories:
- Writing
- Chromeo
- Black Crowes
- Dinosaur Jr
- Hall and Oates
---

Some months ago, I went to go see
[Chromeo](http://www.chromeo.net)![](https://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=whmomyth-20&l=ur2&o=1)
play at the House of Blues and something disturbed me about the show. I like
the
[albums](http://www.amazon.com/gp/redirect.html?ie=UTF8&location=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.amazon.com%2Fgp%2Fentity%2FChromeo%2FB00197I2Z8%3Fie%3DUTF8%26ref_%3Dac_dpt_sa_music&tag=whmomyth-20&linkCode=ur2&camp=1789&creative=390957)![](https://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=whmomyth-20&l=ur2&o=1)
- they're fun, upbeat, and catchy. If you haven't heard them, very very heavily
influenced by mid-80s synth-pop electrofunk. [Aside: Daryl Hall does a video
series where he plays with musicians on his upstate NY farm, posting them on a
site called ["Live from Daryl's
House"](http://www.livefromdarylshouse.com/welcome.html). The Chromeo episode
is amazing, and [the cover of "Family Man"
](http://www.livefromdarylshouse.com/currentep.html?ep_id=35)is particularly
noteworthy] But they're really just a Nostalgia Band.

At the show, the warm-up music was all obscure synthesizer tunes and the crowd
all largely dressed in some combination of 80s nostalgia and modern hipster.
For the unaware, Chromeo is just two guys, guitar and keyboards, heavily
leaning on the [Talk Box](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk_box) (The tube
which musicians stick in their mouth to create the roboty sound you associate
with Peter Frampton, especially ["Show Me the
Way"](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Al9WmowJ3bQ), although the [Dinosaur Jr.
cover](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L8z8Sk2to1U) is probably better than the
original). One guy is Jewish and the other is an Arab, so there's a certain
unity they project, and they're both taking the 80s synthesizer influences and
doing something somewhat new.

Anyhow, anyone who heard the concert would think they were an 80s cover band -
it's definitely a nostalgia act recreating the sound of a bygone era. I took
the negative perspective of this and shared it with my friend. "But you like
[The Black Crowes](http://www.blackcrowes.com/), right? That's just [The
Faces](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Faces_(band)), except from Georgia not
England," he correctly observed. I had just seen The Crowes on their "farewell"
tour at the same venue and I respectfully disagreed - I think they draw a lot
more from gospel than the Faces did, but it's a moot point -The Crowes belong
in another era of 70s-style rock. Other bands have done some variation of the
same trick, sometimes I appreciated it (Lenny Kravitz' brilliant "[Let Love
Rule](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B000000WH0/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=whmomyth-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B000000WH0)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=&l=as2&o=1&a=B000000WH0)",
[Ugly Duckling](http://www.uglyduckling.us/) recreating 80s era hip hop,
especially on "[Taste the
Secret](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00009IC1F/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=whmomyth-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B00009IC1F)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=&l=as2&o=1&a=B00009IC1F)")
and sometimes not ([Drive By Truckers](http://www.drivebytruckers.com/)).

In the long view, I suppose all music is derived from somewhere, its just much
more obvious in some cases than others, and the source material is almost
always better.
